URL: https://www.bls.gov/ooh/math/data-scientists.htm
TITLE: Data Scientists
PUBLISHED: 

Data Scientists : Occupational Outlook Handbook: : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 

 Skip to Content 

 An official website of the United States government 

 Here is how you know 

 United States Department of Labor 

 The .gov means it's official. 

 Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information,
 make sure you're on a federal government site.

 The site is secure. 

 The
 https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any
 information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.

 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 

 Release Calendar | Subscribe 

 Search button 

 Search: 

 Menu 

 Search button 

 Search: 

 Release Calendar | Subscribe 

 Home 

 About BLS 

 History 

 Our Leadership 

 Budget and Performance 

 Questions and Answers 

 A-Z Index 

 Glossary 

 BLS Speakers Available 

 Errata 

 Contact BLS 

 Overview of BLS Statistics 

 Guide to Programs & Services 

 Demographics 

 Industries 

 Business Costs 

 Occupations 

 Geography 

 Resources For 

 Business Leaders 

 Consumers 

 Developers 

 Economists 

 Investors 

 Jobseekers 

 Media 

 Public Policymakers 

 Researcher 

 Students & Teachers 

 Survey Respondents 

 Subjects 

 Inflation & Prices 

 Consumer Price Index 

 Producer Price Indexes 

 Import/Export Price Indexes 

 Contract Escalation 

 Price Index Research 

 Pay & Benefits 

 Employment Cost Index 

 Employer Costs for Employee Compensation 

 Wage Data by Occupation 

 Earnings by Demographics 

 Earnings by Industry 

 County Wages 

 Benefits 

 Modeled Wage Estimates 

 Compensation Research 

 Strikes & Lockouts 

 Wage Records from Unemployment Insurance 

 Occupational Requirements 

 Unemployment 

 National Unemployment Rate 

 State & Local Unemployment Rates 

 Unemployment Research 

 Employment 

 National Employment 

 State & Local Employment 

 County Employment 

 Worker Characteristics 

 American Indian Report 

 Employment Projections 

 Job Openings & Labor Turnover Survey 

 Business Response Survey 

 Employment by Occupation 

 Work Experience Over Time 

 Business Employment Dynamics 

 Foreign Direct Investment 

 Employment Research 

 Workplace Injuries 

 Productivity 

 Labor and Total Factor Productivity 

 Productivity Research 

 Spending & Time Use 

 Consumer Expenditures 

 How Americans Spend Time 

 International 

 International Technical Cooperation 

 Import/Export Price Indexes 

 Geographic Information 

 Northeast (Boston-New York) 

 Mid-Atlantic (Philadelphia) 

 Southeast (Atlanta) 

 Midwest (Chicago) 

 Southwest (Dallas) 

 Mountain-Plains (Kansas City) 

 West (San Francisco) 

 Data Tools 

 Data Retrieval Tools 

 BLS Popular Series 

 Series Report 

 Top Picks, One Screen, Multi-Screen, and Maps 

 Data Finder 

 Public Data API 

 Charts and Applications 

 Charts for Economic News Releases 

 CPI Inflation Calculator 

 Injury and Illness Calculator 

 Pay Measure Comparison 

 Demographic Data Sources 

 COVID-19 Economic Trends 

 Industry Productivity Viewer 

 Employment and Wages Data Viewer 

 Industry Finder from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages 

 Customized Tables 

 U.S. Economy at a Glance 

 Regions, States & Areas at a Glance 

 Industry at a Glance 

 Text Files 

 News Release Tables 

 More Sources of Data 

 Restricted Data Access 

 Discontinued Databases 

 Questions & Answers 

 Special Notices 

 Publications 

 Latest Publications 

 The Economics Daily 

 Monthly Labor Review 

 Beyond the Numbers 

 Spotlight on Statistics 

 Reports 

 Videos 

 Career Outlook 

 Occupational Outlook Handbook 

 Geographic Profile 

 Handbook of Methods 

 Research Papers 

 Copyright Information 

 Contact & Help 

 Weekly Update 

 Economic Releases 

 Latest Releases 

 Major Economic Indicators 

 Schedules for news Releases 

 By Month 

 By News Release 

 Current Year 

 Prior Years 

 Archived News Releases 

 Employment & Unemployment 

 Monthly 

 Quarterly, annual, and other 

 Inflation & Prices 

 Pay & Benefits & Workplace Injuries 

 Productivity & Technology 

 Employment Projections 

 Regional News Releases 

 Classroom 

 K-12 Student & Teacher Resources 

 Games & Quizzes 

 Student's Desk 

 Teacher's Desk 

 Questions & Answers 

 Beta 

 Redesigned News Releases 

 OOH HOME | 

 OCCUPATION FINDER | 

 OOH FAQ |

 HOW TO FIND A JOB |

 A-Z INDEX |

 OOH SITE MAP 

 Occupational Outlook Handbook >

 Math >

 Data Scientists

 PRINTER-FRIENDLY 

 Summary 
 What They Do 

 Work Environment 

 How to Become One 

 Pay 

 Job Outlook 

 State & Area Data 
 Similar Occupations 

 More Info 

 Summary 

 Please enable javascript to play this video.

 Video transcript available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uD8DfbJrqRI. 

 Quick Facts: Data Scientists 

 2024 Median Pay 

 $112,590 per year

$54.13 per hour

 Typical Entry-Level Education 
 Bachelor's degree 

 Work Experience in a Related Occupation 
 None 

 On-the-job Training 
 None 

 Number of Jobs, 2024 
 245,900 

 Job Outlook, 2024–34 
 34% (Much faster than average) 

 Employment Change, 2024–34 
 82,500 

 What Data Scientists Do 

 Data scientists use analytical tools and techniques to extract meaningful insights from data.

 Work Environment 

 Data scientists spend much of their time in an office setting. Most work full time.

 How to Become a Data Scientist 

 Data scientists typically need at least a bachelor’s degree in mathematics, statistics, computer science, or a related field to enter the occupation. Some employers require or prefer that applicants have a master’s or doctoral degree. 

 Pay 

 The median annual wage for data scientists was $112,590 in May 2024.

 Job Outlook 

 Employment of data scientists is projected to grow 34 percent from 2024 to 2034, much faster than the average for all occupations.

 About 23,400 openings for data scientists are projected each year, on average, over the decade.

 Many of those openings are expected to result from the need to replace workers who transfer to different occupations or exit the labor force, such as to retire. 

 State & Area Data 

 Explore resources for employment and wages by state and area for data scientists.

 Similar Occupations 

 Compare the job duties, education, job growth, and pay of data scientists with similar occupations.

 More Information, Including Links to O*NET 

 Learn more about data scientists by visiting additional resources, including O*NET, a source on key characteristics of workers and occupations.

 What They Do -> 

 What Data Scientists Do 

 About this section 

 To present their findings, these scientists often make use of data visualization. 

 Data scientists use analytical tools and techniques to extract meaningful insights from data.

 Duties

 Data scientists typically do the following:

 Determine which data are available and useful for the project

 Collect, categorize, and analyze data

 Create, validate, test, and update algorithms and models

 Use data visualization software to present findings

 Make business recommendations to stakeholders based on data analysis

 Data scientists often begin a project by gathering or identifying relevant data sources, such as surveys. They may use a variety of methods to obtain data, including through access to other organizations’ databases or by using web-scraping tools (software that extracts specific information from websites). They may start with large, unstructured datasets, commonly referred to as raw data. To properly analyze the data, these scientists must “clean” the raw data, a process by which they structure the data to make them readable by software programs.

 Data scientists develop algorithms (sets of instructions that tell computers what to do) and models to support programs for machine learning. They use machine learning to classify or categorize data or to make predictions related to the models. Scientists also must test the algorithms and models for accuracy, including for updates with newly collected data.

 Data scientists often use data visualization software to present their findings as charts, maps, and other graphics. Visualization techniques allow data scientists to clearly communicate their analyses to technical and nontechnical audiences, including colleagues, managers, and clients. Ensuring that audiences understand the information helps data scientists make recommendations for business decisions or process changes based on the results of their analysis.

 Some data scientists choose to focus on a particular area of work. For example, data scientists who have a strong coding or engineering background may develop or recommend systems, build machine learning algorithms, and devise ways to enhance web-browsing functions. Others conduct research for reports or academic journals. Still others focus on improving business strategy for activities such as marketing, sales, and user engagement.

 <- Summary Work Environment -> 

 Work Environment About this section 

 Data scientists typically work in an office setting. 

 Data scientists held about 245,900 jobs in 2024. The largest employers of data scientists were as follows:

 Computer systems design and related services 
 11% 

 Insurance carriers and related activities 
 10 

 Management of companies and enterprises 
 10 

 Management, scientific, and technical consulting services 
 6 

 Scientific research and development services 
 5 

 Data scientists spend much of their time in an office setting.

 Work Schedules

 Most data scientists work full time.

 <- What They Do 
 How to Become One -> 

 How to Become a Data Scientist About this section 

 Data scientists need strong computer skills. 

 Data scientists typically need at least a bachelor’s degree in mathematics, statistics, computer science, or a related field to enter the occupation. However, some employers require or prefer that candidates have a master’s or doctoral degree.

 Education

 Data scientists typically need at least a bachelor’s degree, but some jobs require a master’s or doctoral degree. Common fields of degree include mathematics , statistics, computer science , business , and engineering .

 Because data science involves the use of algorithms and statistical techniques, students need extensive study in mathematics and statistics. High school students interested in becoming data scientists should take classes in subjects such as linear algebra, calculus, and probability and statistics.

 At the college level, courses in computer science are important in addition to math and statistics. Students must learn data-oriented programming languages as well as statistical, database, and other software for presenting analyses.

 Other Experience

 Some employers require industry-related experience or education. For example, data scientists seeking work in an asset management company may need to have experience in the finance industry or to have completed coursework that demonstrates an understanding of investments, banking, or related subjects.

 Important Qualities

 The following are examples of qualities that are important for these workers to perform their duties. For more information, visit the Employment Projections (EP) skills data page .

 Analytical skills. Data scientists must be adept at researching and at examining and interpreting findings.

 Computer skills. Data scientists must be able to write code, analyze data, develop or improve algorithms, and use data visualization tools.

 Communication skills. Data scientists must be able to convey the results of their analysis to technical and nontechnical audiences to make business recommendations.

 Logical-thinking skills. Data scientists must understand and be able to design and develop statistical models and to analyze data.

 Math skills. Data scientists use statistical methods to collect and organize data.

 Problem-solving skills. Data scientists must devise solutions to the problems they encounter in data collection and cleaning and in developing statistical models and algorithms.

 <- Work Environment 
 Pay -> 

 Pay About this section 

 Data Scientists
 Median annual wages, May 2024

 Data scientists $112,590 

 Mathematical science occupations $104,620 

 Total, all occupations $49,500 

 Note: All Occupations includes all occupations in the U.S. Economy.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics

The median annual wage for data scientists was $112,590 in May 2024. 
The median wage is the wage at which half the workers in an occupation earned more than that amount and half earned less. The lowest 10 percent earned less than $63,650, and the highest 10 percent earned more than $194,410.

 In May 2024, the median annual wages for data scientists in the top industries in which they worked were as follows:

 Computer systems design and related services 

 $128,020

 Management of companies and enterprises 

 126,940

 Scientific research and development services 

 120,090

 Management, scientific, and technical consulting services 

 110,240

 Insurance carriers and related activities 

 108,920

 Most data scientists work full time.

 <- How to Become One 
 Job Outlook -> 

 Job Outlook About this section 

 Data Scientists
 Percent change in employment, projected 2024–34

 Data scientists 34% 

 Mathematical science occupations 27% 

 Total, all occupations 3% 

 Note: All Occupations includes all occupations in the U.S. Economy.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment Projections program

 Employment of data scientists is projected to grow 34 percent from 2024 to 2034, much faster than the average for all occupations.

 About 23,400 openings for data scientists are projected each year, on average, over the decade.

 Many of those openings are expected to result from the need to replace workers who transfer to different occupations or exit the labor force, such as to retire. 

 Employment

 Employment growth for data scientists is expected to stem from an increased demand for data-driven decisions. The volume of data available and the potential uses for that data will increase over the projections decade. As a result, organizations will likely need more data scientists to mine and analyze the large amounts of information and data collected. Data scientists’ analysis will help organizations to make informed decisions and improve their business processes, to design and develop new products, and to better market their products. 

 Employment projections data for data scientists, 2024–34 

 Occupational Title 
 SOC Code 
 Employment, 2024 
 Projected Employment, 2034 
 Change, 2024–34 
 Employment by Industry 

 Percent 
 Numeric 

 SOURCE: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment Projections program

 Data scientists 

 15-2051 
 245,900 
 328,300 
 34 
 82,500 
 Get data 

 <- Pay 
 State & Area Data -> 

 State & Area Data About this section 

 Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) 

 The Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program produces employment and wage estimates annually for over 800 occupations. These estimates are available for the nation as a whole, for individual states, and for metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas. The link below goes to OEWS data maps for employment and wages by state and area. Use the dropdown boxes to select an occupation.

 Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) Profiles 

 Projections Central 

 Occupational employment projections are developed for all states by Labor Market Information (LMI) or individual state Employment Projections offices. All state projections data are available at www.projectionscentral.org . Information on this site allows projected employment growth for an occupation to be compared among states or to be compared within one state. In addition, states may produce projections for areas; there are links to each state’s websites where these data may be retrieved.

 CareerOneStop 

 CareerOneStop includes hundreds of occupational profiles with data available by state and metro area. There are links in the left-hand side menu to compare occupational employment by state and occupational wages by local area or metro area. There is also a salary info tool to search for wages by zip code.

 <- Job Outlook 
 Similar Occupations -> 

 Similar Occupations About this section 

 This table shows a list of occupations with job duties that are similar to those of data scientists.

 Occupation 
 Job Duties 
 ENTRY-LEVEL EDUCATION 
 2024 MEDIAN PAY 

 Actuaries 

 Actuaries use mathematics, statistics, and financial theory to analyze the economic costs of risk and uncertainty.

 Bachelor's degree 

 $125,770 

 Computer and Information Research Scientists 

 Computer and information research scientists design innovative uses for new and existing computing technology.

 Master's degree 

 $140,910 

 Economists 

 Economists conduct research, prepare reports, and evaluate issues related to monetary and fiscal policy. They also may collect and analyze statistical data.

 Master's degree 

 $115,440 

 Financial Analysts 

 Financial analysts guide businesses and individuals in decisions about expending money to attain profit.

 Bachelor's degree 

 $101,910 

 Market Research Analysts 

 Market research analysts study consumer preferences, business conditions, and other factors to assess potential sales of a product or service.

 Bachelor's degree 

 $76,950 

 Mathematicians and Statisticians 

 Mathematicians and statisticians analyze data and apply computational techniques to solve problems.

 Master's degree 

 $104,350 

 Operations Research Analysts 

 Operations research analysts use mathematics and logic to help solve complex issues.

 Bachelor's degree 

 $91,290 

 Software Developers, Quality Assurance Analysts, and Testers 

 Software developers design computer applications or programs. Software quality assurance analysts and testers identify problems with applications or programs and report defects. 

 Bachelor's degree 

 $131,450 

 Survey Researchers 

 Survey researchers design and conduct surveys and analyze data.

 Master's degree 

 $63,380 

 <- State & Area Data 
 More Info -> 

 Contacts for More Information About this section 

 O*NET

 Business Intelligence Analysts 

 Clinical Data Managers 

 Data Scientists 

 <- Similar Occupations 

 Suggested citation: 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook , Data Scientists, 

 at https://www.bls.gov/ooh/math/data-scientists.htm (visited June 24, 2026 ).

 Last modified date: 
 August 28, 2025 

 What They Do

 The What They Do tab describes the typical duties and responsibilities of workers in the occupation, including what tools and equipment they use and how closely they are supervised. This tab also covers different types of occupational specialties.

 Work Environment

 The Work Environment tab includes the number of jobs held in the occupation and describes the workplace, the level of physical activity expected, and typical hours worked. It may also discuss the major industries that employed the occupation. This tab may also describe opportunities for part-time work, the amount and type of travel required, any safety equipment that is used, and the risk of injury that workers may face.

 How to Become One

 The How to Become One tab describes how to prepare for a job in the occupation. This tab can include information on education, training, work experience, licensing and certification, and important qualities that are required or helpful for entering or working in the occupation.

 Pay

 The Pay tab describes typical earnings and how workers in the occupation are compensated—annual salaries, hourly wages, commissions, tips, or bonuses. Within every occupation, earnings vary by experience, responsibility, performance, tenure, and geographic area. For most profiles, this tab has a table with wages in the major industries employing the occupation. It does not include pay for self-employed workers, agriculture workers, or workers in private households because these data are not collected by the Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) survey, the source of BLS wage data in the OOH.

 State & Area Data

 The State and Area Data tab provides links to state and area occupational data from the Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) program, state projections data from Projections Central, and occupational information from the Department of Labor's CareerOneStop.

 Job Outlook

 The Job Outlook tab describes the factors that affect employment growth or decline in the occupation, and in some instances, describes the relationship between the number of job seekers and the number of job openings.

 Similar Occupations

 The Similar Occupations tab describes occupations that share similar duties, skills, interests, education, or training with the occupation covered in the profile.

 Contacts for More Information

 The More Information tab provides the Internet addresses of associations, government agencies, unions, and other organizations that can provide additional information on the occupation. This tab also includes links to relevant occupational information from the Occupational Information Network (O*NET).

 2024 Median Pay

 The wage at which half of the workers in the occupation earned more than that amount and half earned less. Median wage data are from the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics survey. In May 2024, the median annual wage for all workers was $49,500.

 On-the-job Training

 Additional training needed (postemployment) to attain competency in the skills needed in this occupation.

 Entry-level Education

 Typical level of education that most workers need to enter this occupation.

 Work experience in a related occupation

 Work experience that is commonly considered necessary by employers, or is a commonly accepted substitute for more formal types of training or education.

 Number of Jobs, 2024

 The employment, or size, of this occupation in 2024, which is the base year of the 2024–34 employment projections.

 Job Outlook, 2024-34

 The projected percent change in employment from 2024 to 2034. The average growth rate for all occupations is 3 percent.

 Employment Change, 2024-34

 The projected numeric change in employment from 2024 to 2034.

 Entry-level Education

 Typical level of education that most workers need to enter this occupation.

 On-the-job Training

 Additional training needed (postemployment) to attain competency in the skills needed in this occupation.

 Employment Change, projected 2024-34

 The projected numeric change in employment from 2024 to 2034.

 Growth Rate (Projected)

 The percent change of employment for each occupation from 2024 to 2034.

 Projected Number of New Jobs

 The projected numeric change in employment from 2024 to 2034.

 Projected Growth Rate

 The projected percent change in employment from 2024 to 2034.

 2024 Median Pay

 The wage at which half of the workers in the occupation earned more than that amount and half earned less. Median wage data are from the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics survey. In May 2024, the median annual wage for all workers was $49,500.

 Home 

 Subjects 

 Data Tools 

 Publications 

 Economic Releases 

 Classroom 

 Beta 

 Help improve this site 

 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
 Occupational Outlook Handbook 
 Office of Employment and Unemployment Statistics 
 Suitland Federal Center 
 Floor 3 
 4600 Silver Hill Road 
 Washington, DC 20212-0002 

 Telephone: 202-691-5700 

 www.bls.gov/ooh 
 Contact OOH 

 resources 

 Inspector General (OIG) 

 Budget and Performance 

 Department of Labor Grants 

 No Fear Act 

 USA.gov 

 about the site 

 Sitemap 

 Freedom of Information Act 

 Privacy and Security Statement 

 Disclaimers 

 Linking and Copyright Info 

 Important Website Notices 

 Help and Tutorials 

 Accessibility Statement 

 Connect With BLS 

 Bluesky 

 Instagram 

 LinkedIn 

 Threads 

 Visit BLS on X 

 Youtube 

 Email 

 Publications 
 Occupational Outlook Handbook 
 Math