URL: https://sfia-online.org/en/sfia-9/skills/data-science
TITLE: Data science
PUBLISHED: 

Data science — English 

 Log in / Register 

 Newsletter 

 English

 English 

 Deutsch 

 Español 

 Français 

 Italiano 

 Nederlands 

 Polski 

 Português 

 Français (Canada) 

 العربية 

 中文 

 日本語 

 Русский 

 The global skills and competency framework for the digital world 

 Home 
 Using SFIA About SFIA 
 SFIA and skills management 
 How SFIA works - Levels of responsibility and skills 
 SFIA Levels of responsibility 
 SFIA professional skills 
 Why SFIA skills are not defined at all 7 levels 
 The context for SFIA 
 About SFIA - Appendices 
 Get accredited 
 Licensing SFIA 
 Browse the framework 

 The SFIA framework Browse the framework - skills, levels, views 
 SFIA 9 - the current version 
 SFIA 10 - in consultation 
 SFIA 8 - previous version 
 Older versions of SFIA 

 Resources Resources home 
 SFIA for ... 
 Standard skills profiles 
 About SFIA views 
 Using SFIA 
 Get help to use SFIA 
 SFIA and Bodies of Knowledge 
 SFIA User stories 
 SFIA Assessment, Credentials and Digital Badges 
 Collaborations 
 SFIA 9 - a framework for AI skills 
 SFIA - a framework for cyber security skills 
 SFIA - a framework for cloud-computing skills 
 Interactive tools for finding skills and building position descriptions 

 Learning hub Learning hub - learning paths, tests, training and implementation resources 

 Community News 
 SFIA User stories 
 User forum 
 SFIA Week 2025 

 Log in / Register 

 Newsletter 

 Search Site 

 Search 

 Advanced Search… 

 Home 

 SFIA 9 

 Skills 

 Data science

 Data science 
 Applying mathematics, statistics, data mining and predictive modelling techniques to gain insights, predict behaviours and generate value from data. 
 https://sfia-online.org/en/sfia-9/skills/data-science 
 https://sfia-online.org/@@site-logo/sfialogo-outlines.svg 

 Data science
 DATS 

 Applying mathematics, statistics, data mining and predictive modelling techniques to gain insights, predict behaviours and generate value from data.

 Levels of responsibility for this skill

 2 

 3 

 4 

 5 

 6 

 Revision notes 

 Updates for SFIA 9 

 Theme(s) influencing the updates for this skill: Continued refinement for data and analytics skills. 

 Level 7 has been moved to a new skill - Data analytics 

 Content and/or readability changes have been made to levels 2, 4, 5, and 6. 

 You can move to SFIA 9 when you are ready - SFIA 8 skill descriptions will still be available to use. 

 Previous SFIA assessments or skills mapping may be impacted by this change. 

 Guidance notes

 Data science is typically used for analysing high volume, high velocity and high variety data (numbers, symbols, text, sound and image).

 Activities may include, but are not limited to:

 integrating methods from mathematics, statistics and probability modelling using specialised programming languages, tools and techniques

 sourcing and preparing data for analysis

 identifying, validating and exploiting internal and external data sets generated from a diverse range of processes

 developing forward-looking, predictive, real-time, model-based insights to create value and drive effective decision-making

 finding, selecting, acquiring and ingesting data sources

 integrating and cleansing data to make it fit for purpose

 developing hypotheses and exploring data using models and analytics sandboxes

 refining requirements, validating, training and evolving models over time to discover deeper insights, make predictions or generate recommendations

 using advanced analytic techniques including, but not limited to: data/text mining, machine learning, pattern matching, forecasting, visualisation, semantic analysis, sentiment analysis, network and cluster analysis, multivariate statistics, graph analysis, simulation, complex event processing and neural networks.

 Understanding the responsibility levels of this skill 

 Where lower levels are not defined...

 Specific tasks and responsibilities are not defined because the skill requires a higher level of autonomy, influence, and complexity in decision-making than is typically expected at these levels. You can use the essence statements to understand the generic responsibilities associated with these levels.

 Where higher levels are not defined...

 Responsibilities and accountabilities are not defined because these higher levels involve strategic leadership and broader organisational influence that goes beyond the scope of this specific skill. See the essence statements.

 Developing skills and demonstrating responsibilities related to this skill

 The defined levels show the incremental progression in skills and responsibilities.

 Where lower levels are not defined...

 You can develop your knowledge and support others who do have responsibility in this area by:

 Learning key concepts and principles related to this skill and its impact on your role

 Performing related skills (see the related SFIA skills)

 Supporting others who are performing higher level tasks and activities

 Where higher levels are not defined...

 You can progress by developing related skills which are better suited to higher levels of organisational leadership.

 Click to learn why SFIA skills are not defined at all 7 levels. 

 Show/hide extra descriptions and levels. 

 Level 1 

 Level 1 - Follow : 
 Essence of the level: Performs routine tasks under close supervision, follows instructions, and requires guidance to complete their work. Learns and applies basic skills and knowledge.

 Data science:
 Level 2 

 Level 2 - Assist : 
 Essence of the level: Provides assistance to others, works under routine supervision, and uses their discretion to address routine problems. Actively learns through training and on-the-job experiences.

 Under routine supervision, applies specified data science techniques to data.

 Analyses and reports findings and addresses simple issues, using algorithms included within standard software frameworks and tools.

 Data science:
 Level 3 

 Level 3 - Apply : 
 Essence of the level: Performs varied tasks, sometimes complex and non-routine, using standard methods and procedures. Works under general direction, exercises discretion, and manages own work within deadlines. Proactively enhances skills and impact in the workplace.

 Applies standard data science techniques to new problems and datasets using specialised programming techniques.

 Identifies and selects appropriate data sources and prepares data to be used by data science models.

 Evaluates the outcomes and performance of data science models. Identifies and implements opportunities to train and improve models and the data they use. 

 Publishes and reports on model outputs to meet customer needs and conform to agreed standards.

 Data science:
 Level 4 

 Level 4 - Enable : 
 Essence of the level: Performs diverse complex activities, supports and guides others, delegates tasks when appropriate, works autonomously under general direction, and contributes expertise to deliver team objectives.

 Investigates problems and datasets to assess the usefulness of data science solutions. 

 Applies diverse data science techniques and specialised programming languages. Understands and applies rules and guidelines specific to the industry and business, and anticipates risks and other implications of modelling.

 Selects, acquires and integrates data for analysis. Formulates hypotheses and evaluates data science models. Advises on the effectiveness of specific techniques based on analysis findings and research. 

 Contributes to the development, evaluation, monitoring and deployment of data science solutions.

 Data science:
 Level 5 

 Level 5 - Ensure, advise : 
 Essence of the level: Provides authoritative guidance in their field and works under broad direction. Accountable for delivering significant work outcomes, from analysis through execution to evaluation.

 Plans, coordinates and drives all stages of the development of data science solutions. 

 Provides expert advice to evaluate the problems to be solved and the need for data science solutions. Identifies and justifies what data sources to use or acquire. 

 Specifies and applies appropriate data science techniques and specialised programming languages.

 Critically reviews the benefits and value of data science techniques and tools and recommends improvements. Contributes to developing policy, standards and guidelines for developing, evaluating, monitoring and deploying data science solutions.

 Data science:
 Level 6 

 Level 6 - Initiate, influence : 
 Essence of the level: Has significant organisational influence, makes high-level decisions, shapes policies, demonstrates leadership, promotes organisational collaboration, and accepts accountability in key areas.

 Champions and leads the introduction and use of data science to drive innovation and business value. 

 Develops and drives adoption of and adherence to organisational policies, standards, guidelines and methods for data science.

 Sets direction and leads in the introduction and use of data science techniques, methodologies and tools. Leads the development of organisational capabilities for data science. 

 Plans and leads strategic, large and complex data science initiatives to generate insights, create value and drive decision-making.

 Level 7 

 Level 7 - Set strategy, inspire, mobilise : 
 Essence of the level: Operates at the highest organisational level, determines overall organisational vision and strategy, and assumes accountability for overall success.

 Keywords 

 Split 

 Level removed 

 SFIA version 
 9

 Framework status: 
 Current standard 

 Links

 Find out about the next version of SFIA 

 Skills directory A-Z 

 Levels of responsibility 

 SFIA skills profiles 

 Bodies of knowledge 

 Related SFIA skills

 Business intelligence 

 Data management 

 Data visualisation 

 Machine learning 

 Data modelling and design 

 Data engineering 

 Programming/software development 

 Data analytics 

 Artificial intelligence (AI) and data ethics 

 Scientific modelling 

 Numerical analysis 

 High-performance computing 

 Short links to this skill 

 Explanation

 SFIA 10

 SFIA 8

 The SFIA Foundation

 The SFIA Foundation is a global not-for-profit organisation which oversees the production and use of the Skills Framework for the Information Age

 Support

 About us 

 Contact us 

 Site map 

 Privacy 

 Terms and conditions 

 Accessibility 

 Follow us

 LinkedIn 

 SFIA User Forum 

 Twitter 

 YouTube 

 SlideShare 

 © Copyright SFIA Foundation 2003-2025. The trade mark SFIA is protected in more than 35 countries throughout the world.

 The SFIA Foundation. A private company limited by guarantee. Registered in England number 04770377. Registered office: The Scalpel, 18th Floor, 52 Lime Street, London EC3M 7AF, UK (not for correspondence)